---
layout: post
title:  "Our Land, Our Lives, Our Future"
date:   2020-12-01 10:32:00 -0700
categories: land
---

# Part 1: Bankrupt Ideas

I graduated from college twelve years ago. Since then, I've worked
in politics and government and non-profits and corporations, and for
organizations on the political "left" and "right" and everywhere
inbetween. My first job paid $50 a month (in Brazil) and my current
one pays around $200,000 at a software mega-corporation. So it's been
a somewhat meandering tour through different slices of life and
politics and society.

I want to share some terrible ideas that I've collected over the
course of my tour.

Why share bad ideas? Well, one thing I think we can all agree on is
that in the course of history, terrible ideas have often had massive
influence over large groups of people. In the past 200 years, the
easiest examples to point to are various flavors of racist ideologies
that justified slavery, genocide, mass war, segregation, and
imperialism. These were (and are) ideas about "racial superiority"
that were based on junk science and junk philosophy at the service of
greed and bloodlust. But there are also less abhorrent bad ideas --
for example, that left-handedness is a curse to be beaten out of small
kids -- that large numbers of people believed for a long time and that
created senseless harm in our world.

So I think it's safe to assume that, just like at every other point in
history, that there are some really bad ideas floating around, ideas
that people will find as stupid as the idea that we need should
sacrifice goats to please Zeus for good fortune.

I can't say that these are the worst ideas, and definitely not the
only bad ideas, but these are ideas that seem to be (1) held by a lot
of people I've met, especially in the college-educated crowd, and (2)
really bankrupt at the core.

#### Bankrupt Idea 1: People should have to work 40 hours a week to afford a good life

I say this because there's a very common but usually unspoken
assumption that our "economy can't afford" to allow people to work
dramatically less than they do today and still have enough money to
pay for a good life. This is nonsense.

Here’s how I’d define a "good life." Safe, sanitary living conditions,
free from preventable risks to health and safety. Nutritious meals.
Protection from the elements. Opportunities for cultural stimulation,
recreation, and exercise. Easy access to trustworthy child care. Local
community of friends and family. Engagement in civic life. Protection
from arbitrary discrimination and oppression.

The fact is that humans have been working at this for 100,000 years.
We know how to provide all these extremely efficiently, if we choose
to. There is just no question about this. A good life is not
fundamentally expensive.

In the United States, productivity has gone up more than threefold
since 1960. That means, in very crude terms, that we can produce three
times as much stuff -- food, energy, housing, clothing -- with the
same amount of effort. Or put differently, we could enjoy a 1960s-era
standard of material wealth, if we wanted to, while working one-third
the hours. And it gets better: with the same income, we could still
afford a lot of modern stuff. A modern laptop, adjusted for inflation,
costs less than a black-and-white tabletop TV did in 1960[^1]. A new
2019 Kia Forte -- complete with its better fuel-efficiency, safety
features, and satellite radio -- costs just about the same as a new
1960 Volkswagen, when you adjust for inflation (around $15,000)[^2].
Your internet connection and worldwide free communications would still
cost less than the phone bill did back in 1960. You wouldn't lose
those things. They're all the results of countless ingenious
time-saving inventions that are never going to be un-invented.

At the same time, we're working now more than ever, despite the number
of people who have left the workforce and lost jobs due to
displacement and automation. It's particularly acute for married
families. In 1960, the average hours worked per adult in a married,
working-age couple was 25 hours; in 2005, it was 32 hours. This is
mostly due to the increased labor participation of women, but also, as
we'll see below, college graduates and salaried workers.[^3].

We all know people who were alive in 1960. It's worth asking them
whether the material quality of life (put aside
politics/segregation/racism/sexism, which were clearly awful but not
related to the cost of food or a car) was so bad -- so bad that we
wouldn't accept them in return for a single-earner 15-hour workweek
that'd pay all the bills for the whole family.

This whole line of argument has been around for a long time. Thomas
Paine made the argument in his 1795 pamphlet, *Agrarian Justice.* The
economist John Maynard Keynes famously predicted in 1930 that within a
century, the 15-hour workweek would be standard. Peter Kropotkin made
roughly the same calculation in 1892. It's just common sense. Better
technics (technology + techniques) produce more stuff with less
effort. And the technics always get better.

If people have been making this argument for so long, why hasn't it
gotten much traction? Why isn't the 15-hour workweek, or perhaps the
four-month workyear, the standard?

First, we live in a capitalist economy. Wage workers produce more
value than they're paid, and the excess value goes to the owners of
capital. So owners have every reason to want their employees to work
as much as possible. And so they'll lobby and resist furiously to
prevent any additional concessions to workers that could impact
profitability. When there's no force of organized workers to
counterbalance, the capitalists win. The 40-hour workweek was only won
after bitter struggle between organized labor and capitalists, the
likes of which we haven't seen in a very long time.

Second, and this is related, basically all of the productivity gains
have accrued to owners of capital. In other words, when better
technics are introduced, workers get paid the same, or get fired, and
the gains go to right the capitalists. This is no secret.

Third, some things really have gotten a lot more expensive, even
adjusting for inflation. Medical care, rent, formal education, and
child care have ballooned in the past half-century, much faster than
inflation. What's obvious about these categories is that they're all
services, not products. If we're paying more money for the same
services, we're getting scammed. In Part 3 I'll get into some ideas
for how to escape from the scam. But suffice it to say, there's
fundamentally a scam behind each of these services, though rent is the
king of scams. But while we're victims of the scam, it is true that
the gains of productivity are getting squeezed away in our increased
rents and child care and medical bills.

And fourth, corporations have gotten better and better at squeezing
more hours out of their salaried workers -- who don't even make more
money when they work more hours. Economic research shows that around
1970, salaried employees started working more and more hours,
primarily as a result of greater "perceived job insecurity" and
corporate bonus, career advancement, and promotion incentives.[^4]

These are all hard facts about the way our society is organized. It is
not obvious what we'd need need to do to change the balance of power
and wealth and to rearrange ownership in order to work less. I will
suggest some first steps in Part 3. But what is blindingly obvious is
that we have the skills, the technics, the machines at our disposal in
order to free up most of our waking hours for our pursuits of passion,
purpose, and community, if we accept an incrementally humbler material
existence.

Some people are already "there," too. There's a whole "financial
independence" community of people (mostly in software and real estate
from what I've seen) who figured out how to minimize their cost of
living and save up money to retire early, sometimes before age 30.
They're also almost without fail highly privileged and
college-educated. We can go further.

Technics developed over the generations are part of the shared human
heritage of invention and discovery. Everyone willing to work should
have an option to earn a decent living for his or her family, with the
help of our technical heritage, on 15 hours a week or four months a
year of 40-hour weeks.

![productivity over time](/images/productivity-chart.png)
![family hours worked (source:https://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/sr/sr397.pdf](/images/family-hours.png)
#### Bankrupt Idea 2: We Should Hope for Politicians to Solve our Social Problems

> "Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for
your country."  - US President John F. Kennedy, Inaugural address,
January 21, 1961

> "America does not want to witness a food fight; they want to know
how we’re going to put food on their table." - US Senator Kamala
Harris, Democratic Party Presidential Debate, June 27, 2019

For any large-scale social change, there's a general sequence of
steps. Step One: ideas spread, through conversations, lectures, books,
radio, etc. Then, Step Two: civil society institutions -- think about
universities, newspapers, religious associations, nonprofit groups --
explicitly agitate for change at a larger scale. There are all sorts
of actions -- at the level of individual decisions, family choices,
company policies, applying pressure via boycotts and strikes -- that
don't require any changes in law. People push for change at these
levels, at the scale of our everyday lives. It's at this level where
the "war of ideas" really plays out.

And then finally Step Three: politicians and governments only come in
at the very end, in fits and starts, in the messy process of
legislation, once the war of ideas has already played out. Legislation
isn't always required, but sometimes it is, and it can easily backfire
or have unintended consequences. And the timing is always uncertain,
depending on who happens to hold power in which places, and where an
issue fits in lots of politicians' political priorities.

The point is, that legislation and policymaking is the final step in
social change, not always a necessary step, and the one which we can
influence the least as regular citizens. And so the bankrupt idea is
that if we could just elect some great politicians, that our social
problems would be solved. Or conversely, that if we have bad
politicians in office, that there's nothing we can do to make progress
on fixing them.

The right way to look at this instead, is just to invest a lot more
energy and hope in Step One and Step Two: spreading and debating
ideas, supporting organizations that will advocate on behalf of good
ideas regardless of who happens to be in office, and supporting causes
that can be activated outside of the political system. This isn't a
new insight, but there are so many people so wrapped up in
presidential politics specifically, that it bears repeating.

Take the issue of gun violence, for example. America clearly has a
problem with gun violence. Liberals tend to place the blame on lax gun
control laws. Conservatives point to mental health problems that
afflict violent individuals. It's pretty clear that both sides are
partially correct. But if you actually care about reducing gun
violence, the least effective possible way to do so is to vote for an
"anti-gun" or "pro-mental-health" presidential candidate. If your
candidate loses, your effort was for naught. If she wins, there's no
guaranteeing she'll actually be able to pass tighter gun control laws
and even less guarantee that she'll be able to legislate better mental
health for the whole country.

But there are so many other ways to make a tangible difference that
don't depend on who happens to win or what laws happen to pass. Donate
to a gun control advocacy organization -- one that will apply pressure
year after year to change laws in all 50 states. Or do your part to
address the mental health epidemic. Reach out more to neighbors who
seem isolated and withdrawn. Be a part of a religious organization
that helps give purpose and community to the most marginalized members
of society. Work less, spend less time consuming media, spend more
time building relationships.

True, these are all easier said than done (I'd never donated to a gun
control organization before I wrote this). So at the very least, if
you find yourself caught in the argument that "this is the most
important election of our lifetime", appreciate that that argument
only serves politicians and pundits and media companies whose
incentives are very different from yours and mine. Political news is
fundamentally entertainment and elections are the least effective tool
of social change. Don't get your hopes up that they'll save our world.

#### Bankrupt Idea 3: There Are Two Categories of Americans

We live in the era of "mega identity."[^5] There are seemingly two
categories of Americans: Republican and Democrat. Once you know which
bucket someone falls into, you can also reliably predict much more
about them. In the book, Uncivil Agreement: How Politics Became
Identity, Liliana Mason wrote, "A single vote can now indicate a
person’s partisan preference, as well as his or her religion, race,
ethnicity, gender, neighborhood and favorite grocery store."

In one sense, the facts are indisputable. We have indeed become more
predictable. And that means that we're thinking less and less for
ourselves, and accepting more and more the dogma of our cable news
channel of choice.

But things don't have to be this way. And we should be outraged that
we are. It's completely absurd to think that in a complex society of
300 million people, that we can be so easily split into just two
categories. If we aren't thinking for ourselves, if we are so easily
predicted, then we are not free. We are something like automatons.

Who's controlling the automatons? The "mega-identity" trend of course
has complex roots. But if we want to understand why things are this
way, we just have to ask the classic economic question: who benefits?

Large media companies prefer there to be as few categories as
possible: If not one, then two. The few the number of categories, the
larger possible audience in each category. The bigger the audience,
the more money they can make. Large media companies also prefer people
to be predictable: the more predictable, the more certain they can be
that a given piece of content will "engage" their audience and earn
advertising or subscription money.

Advertisers also prefer people to be predictable. The more
predictable, the more effectively they can advertise.

And of course, major political parties prefer this, too. The more
predictable their constituents, the easier it is to market to them, to
engage them, to craft compelling ads. It's a lot cheaper to be able to
create one TV or internet ad that plays across the country than to
have to make totally different ads for different states and counties
and constituencies.

But it's no use to blame media and advertising and political parties.
They're just pursuing their own self-interests in a capitalist
society. We, regular people, have to recognize that this whole trend
of "mega-identity" is a sad state of affairs. It's a bankrupt idea
that humans are so simplistic, so unfree in our thinking, that there
are basically "just two categories." In Part Two I'll come back to
this with an idea for one way to break out of it.

#### Bankrupt Idea 4: Cities Are More Interesting Than Towns

There's a particular category of people, especially fresh college
graduates, that gets caught by this bad idea. I was one of them. The
general line of thinking goes: big cities have the "most interesting"
people, the best restaurants, the richest culture. Therefore, cities
are interesting. Let us examine each one of these claims.

Most interesting people. What this really tends to mean is, "the most
people like me." In reality, there's no way to know what it means to
be an "interesting person" and certainly no way to know in advance
whether one place has more or fewer of them. We all end up spending
time with a small number of colleagues, friends, family, and others
with shared interests. Unless you need to have friends who share some
really specialized interests -- say, Paraguayan cuisine -- you'll find
good, friend-worthy people anywhere if you're willing to talk to
people who aren't just like you.

The best restaurants. This is probably true. But since when are we so
elitist that we "must" live where there's the best fine dining? Since
when was it respectable and not snobbish to declare oneself a
"foodie"?

The richest culture. By this, people tend to mean something like "more
art museums" or "more jazz clubs." But real culture is participatory
-- sharing in the process of making art and music. It's true that
cities have the most bountiful opportunities to consume live shows.
All other consumer media -- music, film, radio, books, newspapers --
can of course be consumed from anywhere there's an internet
connection. But what you want is to participate in culture. And in
that sense, there's nothing that makes cities particularly privileged.
On the contrary, cities are more professionalized and so they can make
it more difficult to participate as an amateur.

So much for the purported benefits of cities. The costs are obvious:
they are crowded and they are expensive. You lose your time to traffic
and transit and you lose your money to rent. With less time and less
money, you have less freedom to craft life according to your own
values and dreams. You're further from the land and from nature.

So here's the relevant thought experiment: if you could get a good job
in a small town, and be guaranteed that there would be 100 trusted
friends and family in town, would that make it a more interesting
place to live than a nearby city that costs 40% more?

If I'm lucky, I've convinced you that it's a question worth
considering seriously.

#### Bankrupt Idea 5: The American Dream

If cities are too expensive and too congested, what about the suburbs?
Aren't they a logical choice?

No.

The suburbs are not the correct solution to any problem.  They're a
way to escape from the problems of the city -- crime, congestion,
pollution. And they were mostly designed for the benefit of car
companies and banks and homebuilders, not for the benefit of real
families. They don't have the intimacy and connection to the land that
you find in small towns, but they still don't have the walkability of
city life. Nobody should be proud to live in a suburb. People are
there because they're desperately running away from worse options in
the city.

More broadly stated, the whole notion of the American Dream --
long-term suburban single-family homeownership -- is just a bankrupt
idea. It doesn't make practical sense or financial or moral sense.
Plenty of people realize this already but it's still an undercurrent
in the general national consciousness. So let's just spell it out.

First, owning a home is a poor financial investment. This is no
secret. If you have a chunk of cash available for a down payment,
there are simply better ways to make that money grow, if that's your
goal. If you invested $100,000 in an average American home in 1975,
for example, it'd have grown to about $500,000 in 2013. But if you'd
have invested the same amount in the S&P 500, it'd have grown to $1.6
million.[^6] Another illustration of this fact is that if housing were
such a good investment, most homes would be owned by professional
investors.

On average, US housing has historically appreciated only slightly
above inflation. "Investing in my home" is hardly better than opening
a savings account. In reality, the most helpful financial function of
homeownership is a psychological trick: paying a mortgage forces
people to put away money every month towards their "investment" --
even when they could have higher-return investments elsewhere.

Second, the single-family home lifestyle is a colossal sink of time
and money. My wife and I moved to the suburbs because we had three
very small kids (nine-month-old twins and a two-year-old) and just
wanted to make it possible for the kids to get fresh air and be
outdoors during the rare Seattle moments when it wasn't raining. My
wife didn't drive at the time. So we figured that having a yard and a
safe, dead-end street would make it easiest to slip outside and run
around for a bit when the rain stopped. And because of the Seattle
rain, we knew the kids would be indoors a lot, so we thought it'd be
better to have more space (than the two-bedroom apartment we were
leaving) so everyone could be comfortable indoors, and similarly, have
room to jump on a trampoline or do some somersaults or read quietly
through the long winter. Just about everything in the city of Seattle
was out of our price range.

But what we didn't appreciate were all the costs of living in a bigger
home in a less dense neighborhood. Everything around the house took
twice as long. Longer to find the kids around the house! Longer to
corral them to the dining room for a meal. Longer to walk between the
kitchen and dining room to serve a meal. More bathrooms and floors and
windows to keep clean. And not to mention the yard maintenance, which
has actually taken years to figure out. Or the one-hour commute to
work each way. Death of our "down time" by a thousand cuts.

Third, single-family homes are lonely traps for kids and
adults. Single-family-homes are the least dense residential type. That
means, by definition, that it allows the fewest possible people within
walking distance or biking distance. It's the loneliest way to live.

It's even worse when cars dominate the streets. In our neighborhood,
for example, there are no sidewalks. So our kids -- aged 5, 5, and 6
as of this writing -- cannot go anywhere outside of our little
cul-de-sac without an adult to escort or drive them. And it's not
because we don't trust the kids to be out of sight. When we travel to
campgrounds, fairgrounds, or farming communities, the kids get free
reign on their bikes. But back in our neighborhood, the car traffic
just makes it too dangerous for them to roam, at least at this age.

And we see what happens as the neighborhood kids get older. Even when
they're old enough to bike around and contend with cars on the street,
there's nowhere to go. The kids are too spread out, and besides, kids
don't roam the streets and parks anymore (We're all familiar with this
trend, apparently triggered by highly-publicized child murders and
kidnappings in the 1980s). And so parents, guilted by the lonely traps
of their neighborhoods, become semi-professional chauffeurs, shuttling
their teenage kids between organized social activities. It's a trade
of one kind of loneliness for another.

But the same dynamics are at play for the adults, too. There's no
escaping the fact that people are just harder to find when they're
more spread out.

Fourth, homeownership makes people greedy. Owning a home makes people
greedy in two ways. The first way is that when people are bought into
the idea that their home is an investment, they'll naturally do
everything they can to make the value of the investment go up. And the
most obvious way they do that is by keeping other people out of their
neighborhood in order to make it more exclusive, to preserve their
views, and therefore make their own property more valuable. So they
oppose efforts to allow more housing to be built in the neighborhood
to respond to population growth. This has happened all over the place
in Seattle, a city that considers itself to be otherwise liberal and
inclusive.[^7] The effect is that it makes rents and property more
expensive, making life worse for everyone who isn't a homeowner.

The second way that it makes people greedy -- and this is the more
tragic effect -- is that it encourages them to become emotionally
attached to their property, even when it's not growing in value.
There's very well-understood psychological mechanism called cognitive
dissonance at play. When someone makes a huge commitment, like buying
a home, their mind immediately starts to invent reasons why it was a
great decision. It may start with "this is a great financial
investment" but then, after the years, it turns to, "I am in love with
my home." This is how one Chicago condo owner described her attachment
to her home, when a nearby school was considering buying the building
in order to serve more students:

"Our condo is not merely ‘contiguous property,’ as Parker’s board
chair and principal put it. It is our home. It is the childhood home
of our now 20-year-old daughter — the home in which she grew up. It is
our forever home."

What's wrong with loving your home too much? It's the same thing
that's wrong about my son getting so attached to a Lego toy that he
refuses to share it with his brother even when he's not using it.
Being too emotionally attached to property often prevents the owner
from putting it to the best social use. It creates the delusional
attitude of the Chicago condo owner -- that moving from her home would
somehow erase her daughter's childhood memories.

#### Escaping the Trap

But you can't have it all, right? If you want more green space, you
better be willing to maintain it, and you have to accept that the
neighborhood is going to be less dense. If you want a bigger home for
the same price, you have to accept a longer commute. These are the
facts of life.

That's what most of us suburban dwellers tell ourselves, begrudgingly.
For lack of a better alternative, we come to love our useless little
home gardens, take pride in our shiny power tools, and retreat
permanently into domestic suburbia, content to delude ourselves that
we're "making a responsible investment."

But I think we can have it all. We're locked into a set of out-of-date
designs and tradeoffs. We just have to take back our time and get way
out of town.

# Interlude: Maybe the most important fact about American life

Before I move on, there's one other fact about American life that I
have to point out. It's one of those things that I think helps you
understand everything else.

And that's that according to Nielsen, American adults now spend, on
average, between 10 and 11 hours every day watching, listening to, or
reading media content on their TVs, computers, radios, tablets,
consoles, and smartphones.[^8]

To be clear, time interacting with multiple media simultaneously
counts double. So an hour watching TV while browsing social media
counts as two total hours. But still. This is a mind-boggling amount
of time. This does not include reading books or newspapers, or even
making phone calls or writing social media messages. This is 10 to 11
hours of consumption, 365 days a year. Just let that sink in. I’ll
come back to it later.

# Part 2: Gentrifying the Countryside

In the last section, I attempted to expose the bad ideas and trends
that have gotten too many modern American families into a particular
kind of mess: squeezed for time and money when there is more of both
than ever to go around, losing every spare moment to an epic digital
media addiction, duped into believing that overpriced cities are
interesting, sold a bad investment in the lonely, wasteful,
time-sucking suburbs, hoping for politicians to produce solutions that
politicians can't produce alone.

This is not to say that things are worse now than they ever have been,
or that life is fundamentally miserable. On the contrary. But still,
every generation has its own problems, its own bad ideas to exhume,
and they don't discount all the wonderful things happening
simultaneously in the world. These are just the problems for our time,
the problems I've felt firsthand -- and I've been lucky to have
skirted the worst of it.

How do we untangle ourselves? I don’t know. But here are my best
ideas.

#### Civic Solidarity

I like to stop and think every once in a while about every human that
made my day possible. The miners who dug out the aluminum for my
computer. The mothers and wives who fed those miners. The tanker
captains who brought the garlic in my lunch from halfway across the
globe. The construction workers who built my house. The countless
farmers around the globe who made my food possible. The lawyers and
bankers who supported the farms. The computer programmers who
struggled through crashes and errors to make my devices seem so
magical. The native people forcibly displaced my family could
eventually own the land. The day care teacher who looked after the
kids so the painters could paint. And on and on.

It's mind-boggling if you get into it. The worldwide collaborative
dance of trade.

Who's running the show? Who makes it all work? Of course, there's no
single entity. But it's not done on the honor system or by charity
either. Obviously, it's mostly private companies, who operate on the
money system, and whose success depends on earning more of it than
they spend.

And so, even though companies are often competing with each other,
they generally share a few goals. First, they would like for economy
to grow. They would like for people to work as much as possible and to
spend as much time and money as possible consuming things, including
consuming bad things, like addictive drugs or heart-bypass surgeries.
And second, they would like for people to be predictable. That makes
it a lot easier for companies to plan ahead.

Economic growth can be a wonderful thing, and so can consumption. The
problem is that "the economy" does not distinguish between good and
bad types of growth, or productive or destructive kinds of
consumption. It doesn't distinguish between "predictably happy" or
"predictably racist." The economy is bulldozing forward, pursuing
growth and predictability at all costs, with the force of most of the
world's working people behind it.

And it's in that light that I view the bankrupt ideas and troubling
trends from Part 1. They're all symptoms, in one way another, of bad
growth. They're ways in which the economy has managed to create
pockets of profit by selling faulty ideas.

So how do we change the economy?

I submit that we must start with civic solidarity: as volunteer
citizens, organizing outside of the self-sustaining power centers in
corporations and electoral politics and the nonprofits they bankroll.
The reason is this. If you’re in the corporate world, profit and
growth and predictability will always outweigh doing the right thing.
If you’re in a salaried job at a non-profit or government agency or
company with an important social mission, that’s great (I’ve been
there), but you’re quite constrained in voicing your honest opinions,
for fear of professional consequences. If your livelihood depends on
it, you can’t help but prioritize your institution’s values over your
conscience. Or even worse, you ignore the difference between the two.
I saw this tragic effect firsthand when my idealistic peers from the
Obama campaign went to work in Washington.

The point is that voluntary civic associations are really the only
kind of institutions powered by common pursuit of a higher ideal. In
the past, these took the form of religious groups, trade unions,
neighborhood associations, professional associations, and charities.
These all still exist is weaker forms today, but there are also new,
modern forms too. Reddit and WhatsApp and Facebook communities are now
the leading edge of civic society, and where much of the war of ideas
is fought and won. This once was common knowledge, but it seems to
have been lost on many of us. Civic society is the primary vehicle of
social change.

And we must organize. The corporate world is massively well-organized;
consider the dance of global trade I marveled at above, coordinated by
billions of people, millions of organizations large and small,
trillions of dollars of capital, all in the pursuit of more production
and more consumption.

Who’s going to stand in the face of the mega-machine of our economy
and ask it to slow down, to be more cautious, to give us more time to
tend to our families and neighborhoods, to reward sharing and thrift,
to cure our loneliness, to orient itself towards long-term
sustainability and well-being?

Does anybody really trust the Democratic Party or the Republican Party
to do that work? Does anybody really believe that any US President —
no matter how competent — can fix all this on her own? No, civic
society is where that work happens.

As individuals, we are powerless in the face of these organized forces
of economy. Our votes, our consumer decisions, no matter how righteous
and well-considered, are useless if we have no independent apparatus
for coordinating our actions. Otherwise we are steamrolled by the
forces — and the trillions of dollars behind them — that are
coordinated. Namely, the corporate world.

That’s not so say that the corporate world is necessarily an enemy to
be defeated, or that its interests have nothing to do with ours. It’s
fabulously good at giving us what we want, when what we want is very
clearly and unambiguously defined. But it has certain points where its
interests do diverge from ours. Where we have to step in and put it in
its place. Where we have to send a more forceful message about what it
is that we actually want and don’t want.

This is where reasonable people will say, “And that is what government
is for! It’s for putting guardrails on the private sector. That’s why
we have regulators and watchdogs and anti-trust.” But one thing I
didn’t appreciate when I entered the political world as a young Obama
organizer is that government policy is the last and often
unnecessary phase of social change. Before policies change and
politicians are elected come years of work building political power
around ideas and causes. This is where the most important work in
social change happens. This is the space inhabited by Gandhi and MLK
Jr. This point will seem terribly obvious to anybody who’s done even a
little activism, but it just bears repeating because too many people
spend too much time focused on politicians and elections. And too many
smart people believe that changing laws and rules is actually the most
important (or even only) vehicle of social progress.

#### Plugging In

The argument from the previous section is that if we're ever going to
untangle ourselves from the current predicaments of our family life,
our cities, and our economy, that we have to start with voluntary
association and civic solidarity, rather than waiting for politics and
politicians.

Now I want to offer some ideas on where to get started.

First, there are existing organizations and institutions: non-profit
causes of all kinds, religious organizations, social justice
organizations, unions, community associations. When we find one of
these that genuinely aligns with our interests, we should offer our
time and money to these institutions. We just have to be careful about
other people’s agendas: especially, paid employees who want to keep
their jobs and get promoted, and rich donors and philanthropies who
control non-profits for their own purposes. Some non-profits (i.e. the
Republican National Committee) are fully corrupted by those agendas,
whereas others (your local elementary school’s PTA, for example) much
less so. It’s key to have a radar for that. Once that’s cleared,
though, supporting one of these organizations is the easiest way to
plug into civic life.

Second, there are online communities. The great strength and weakness
of these is that they’re generally all-volunteer. In these — Facebook
and Reddit and Twitter communities are the clearest examples — it’s
easier to build passion and enthusiasm (since everybody who’s there
actually wants to be there) but it’s harder to coordinate. But still,
some norms and guidelines and common themes emerge over time, and
these online communities can turn into institutions of their own. The
primary science news community on Reddit (“/r/science”), for example,
is perhaps the world’s most viewed source of science news and
commentary, with more than 20 million subscribers. A single post on a
Reddit politics community was the genesis of the 2017 March for
Science that included over 1 million demonstrators around the world on
Earth Day. These are powerful and impactful communities — and in many
ways, more effective than traditional activist networks.

And third, there are our organic communities of friends and family. We
often don’t think of our family, for example, as an “institution,” but
it absolutely is one — if often less effective and less functional
than it should be. Just like non-profits and insurance companies have
their own mission statements, every family unit has a mission, too: to
provide personal support, security, meaning, companionship and safety
to all of its members. And I’d argue that investing in one’s own
family institution(s) — however big or small, however the boundaries
are drawn, regardless of blood relation — is probably the most
valuable way to build civic solidarity. Having a strong family
institution is the best insurance plan against economic turbulence,
against the loneliness epidemic, against political uncertainty. And
it’s got the tremendous advantage of built-in trust relations, making
it much easier to communicate and solve problems and work past
personal differences compared to faceless online communities or
distant non-profits.

(That’s not in any way saying that personal problems — major ones —
don’t exist within families. That would be the least true statement of
all time. But the fact is that parts of the family that really can’t
stand each other naturally splinter apart, leaving segments composed
of people who genuinely do trust and care about each other much more
than they care about strangers. Each inner core — people who share
high trust — is what I’d consider its own “family institution.” And
it’s that unit that should be cultivated and strengthened and even
expanded as new relations come into the picture.)

“But,” some will say, "I’m not close with my family and don’t think
it’s worth it to get closer.” I get that — there are so many valid
reasons to get to that point, though I do think it’s a tragic place to
get to, since it means that parents somewhere have failed.

Still, if your most important trust relations are elsewhere — friends,
colleagues, associates — then perhaps those relations the starting
point for your real family institution, and you should cultivate that
instead.

What does it mean to cultivate the family institution? Don’t we do
that naturally in our relations with loved ones?

Here’s what my extended family does (and this includes one divorced
couple and all variations of step-siblings and step-parents):

- We have monthly scheduled videoconferences with rotating call
  leaders to share reflections, news, and discuss family business.
- We have paid and free software accounts for calendars, group
  communication, document storage, and project management.
- We collect money from members to pay for our shared accounts and
  software.
- We are organizing a family reunion.
- We send money to extended family members in need.

These are the kind of things that take just a bit more effort and
money than the kind of informal organizing that we used to do before
we introduced the idea of the family as its own institution. It was
really just a mental shift — realizing that we always operate as an
organization, whether we like it or not, so we might as well run it
deliberately.

Issue-oriented non-profits, online communities, organic
friend-and-family networks — these are the wellsprings of focused and
sustained social change in our world today. I’ve come to appreciate
that it’s far more worthwhile to build these institutions than to
gossip about national politicians and governments, or to read or watch
the news entertainment, which all accomplishes nothing or worse.

#### Taking Back Our Time

Invigorating our civic life may sound great. But who’s got time for
that?

As I wrote in Part One, college-educated families are working way too
many hours. It’s not necessary and it’s not healthy. Higher-paid men
have been working more and more hours since the 1970s, and
college-educated women work drastically more than they have
historically. So for the average household with two college-educated
partners and one or more kids, there’s hardly time left for anything
else besides work and parenting and domestic duties.

College-educated people, but in particular salaried employees, just
have to organize to bring down our working hours to a reasonable
level. This should start with large institutions and corporations that
can afford to do this right away; salaried employees should just sign
a pledge that they’re going to work 1970s-era hours (averaged across
men and women) and devote our newfound time to service civic causes to
help our world avoid political and environmental meltdown.

People without a college degree aren’t getting paid well enough, and
so I think their concern is money and not time.

And then for all of us, we have to confront the media consumption
statistics I wrote above. The 10-11 hours a day we spend consuming
media. We can blame the media companies and advertisers for creating
addictive content, but we can only blame ourselves for consuming it.

It’s not that all media are bad. But most TV and social media and
video games are bad. They’re bad because they’re fundamentally about
escapism, about dealing with life’s by problems by visiting other
worlds or lives whey they don’t exist. News is especially bad because
it gives us the illusion that we’re doing something “important” when
it’s just providing a form of gossip. But some social media is
phenomenal, and helps great ideas spread and people organize in ways
they’ve never been able to.

In any event, we just have to be more intentional about media. We
should all have a “philosophy” about what media and how much is
healthy. And we should publish our personal consumption stats and
content as a way to hold ourselves accountable. We should be appalled
by ads that describe TV shows as “binge-worthy.” And we should
aggressively cultivate our social media so that our media diet matches
up with our philosophy.

Otherwise, the media companies have a stranglehold on our precious
attention and they’ll use it for their own purposes. And serving
voluntary civic associations is just about dead last on their priority
list.

And finally, we have to find social safety net mechanisms to make it
easier to stop working for longer periods of time. I’m one of a tiny
number of people who has (1) enough savings and (2) and employer
who’ll allow a 12-week unpaid leave from work. It’s been tremendously
regenerative and positive for my family. And I never would have
written anything without it. But there are so many better writers than
me, with more interesting things to say, who’ll never get the chance.
And so many new parents who are over-worked and over-stressed who’d
benefit even more than me from a break, to attend to their kids and
their families and their neighborhoods. However we do it — government
entitlements, credit unions, direct wealth transfers — the point is
that we have to make it a lot easier to take a lot more time off. It’s
not like we’re going to run out of food if we do. I don’t know how
exactly we get there. But the first step is we all agree with the
general idea.

#### The New Exploration

The other way to take back our time is to reduce our costs of living.
The lower our monthly expenses, the earlier we can retire or take a
12-week unpaid break from work. And the great thing about this
approach is that it’s totally under our control and not dependent on a
government entitlement or a raise from our employer.

Housing is our biggest expense, so that’s the best place to start
reducing cost of living. And the most foolproof ways to do reduce
housing costs are to (1) live more densely, and (2) get far away from
the expensive city centers.

Here’s where I want to paint a picture of what such change might look
like, especially for liberal suburbanites like me. It’s also where I
want to get back to Bankrupt Idea 3 (“Cities are more interesting than
towns”), Bankrupt Idea 4 (“There are two categories of Americans”),
and Bankrupt Idea 5 (“The American Dream”). If I’ve convinced you that
those are, in fact, bad ideas, the path to sanity perhaps inescapably
points to a movement from cities to rural America, or to put it
provocatively, Rural Gentrification.

For inspiration, here’s an except from The New Exploration, written by
Benton MacKaye, the visionary behind America’s treasured Appalachian
Trail, from 1928:

> Here is a significant and decisive question for this generation. Can
> we make of this time and century something better than a chaos of
> industrial cross-purposes? We find ourselves in a the shoes of our
> forefathers: their job was to unravel the wilderness of nature; ours
> is to unfold the wilderness of civilization. Or are we to be lost in
> the jungle of industrialism? Are the elements of water and steam and
> fire to remain our masters, or will they become our “servants for
> noble ends”? Are we going to ride on the railroad or let it ride on
> us?

> The forces set loose in the jungle of our present civilization may
> prove more fierce than any beasts found in the jungle of the
> continents — far more terrible than any storms encountered within
> uncharted seas. Here in America — particularly in Appalachian
> America — we have an area which, potentially, is perhaps the most
> “volcanic” of any area on earth. It is an area laden with the
> ingredients of modern industry and civilization: iron, coal, timber,
> petroleum. It is electric with a high potential — for human
> happiness or human misery. The coal and iron pockets which lie
> beneath the surface may be the seeds of freedom or seeds of
> bitterness; for in them is the latest substance of distant foreign
> wars as well as deep domestic strife.

> These forces are neither “good” nor “bad” but so. And they do not
> stand still, but flow and spread as we have told. Can we control
> their flow before it controls us? Can we do it soon enough? This is
> a crucial question of our day. What instructions can we issue to our
> modern-day explorer (whether technician or amateur) to guide him in
> coping with this modern-day invasion?

> The new explorer, of this “volcanic” country of America, must first
> of all be fit for all-round action: he must combine the engineer,
> the artist, and the military general. It is not for him to “make the
> country,” but it is for him to know the country and the trenchant
> flows that are taking place upon it. He must not scheme, he must
> reveal: he must reveal so well the possibilities of A, B, C, and D
> that when E happens he can handle it. His job is not to wage war —
> nor stress an argument: it is to “wage” a determined visualization.
> His attitude is this must be one not of frozen dogma or irritated
> tension, but of gentle and reposeful power: he must speak softly but
> carry a big map. He need not be a crank, he may not be a hero, but
> he must be a scout. His place is on the frontier — within life’s
> “cambium layer” — the fluid twilight zone of all creative action in
> which the flickering thoughts of future are woven in the structure
> of the past. … And our last instruction to our new explorer and
> frontiersman is to hold ever in sight his final goal — to reveal
> within our innate country, despite the fogs and chaos of cacophonous
> mechanization, a land in which to live — a symphonious environment
> of melody and mystery in which, throughout all ages, we shall “learn
> to reawaken and keep ourselves awake, not by mechanical aids,” but
> by that “infinite expectation of the dawn” which faces the horizon
> of an ever-widening vision.

When those words were written, nearly a century ago, the author
criticized America’s cities as too big, too crowded, too expensive,
too hostile to our human needs.

> In place of a world, there is a city, a point, in which the whole of
> life of broad regions is collecting while the rest dries up. In
> place of a type-true people, born of and grown on the soil, there is
> a new sort of nomad, cohering unstably in fluid masses, the
> parasitical city-dweller, traditionless, utterly matter-of-fact,
> religionless, clever, unfruitful, deeply contemptuous of the
> countrymen. … This is a very great stride toward the inorganic,
> toward the end. …

And MacKaye was well tuned-in to the sprawling lifelessness of the
suburbs — and this was well before the midcentury explosion of
suburban development and “white flight” that we associate with the
1960s and 1970s:

> Not content in making small town into a large town; in developing
> merely a larger community — a unit of humanity within its natural
> borders and confines: not content in making a city, we make a
> super-city. We handle the advancing flow of population toward the
> urban centers just as a mentally deficient engineer would handle the
> advancing flow of water down the valley. First we build a “dam.”
> This consists of office buildings where jobs are to be had. The
> population must reach these office buildings in order to make a
> living. Then we allow the flood of folks to back up against this
> “dam” of office buildings until is backs far outside the confines of
> an integrated city and spills over on adjoining areas. This it does
> in a shapeless widening deluge of headless suburban massings which
> know no bounds or social structure.

> What we call the “suburban” (the under-city) is really “super-urban”
> (the over-city — the outer layers of the tide which overwhelms the
> city). Since there is usually no sharp line between suburbs and the
> city proper, we have, in such centers as New York, Chicago, Detroit,
> and other “Greater” cities,  in truth no city at all. Instead we
> have what Mr. W. J. Wilgus of the New York Central Lines has
> graphically called a “massing of humanity.”

He contrasts the lack of social structure in the suburbs with his
experience growing up in a New England village not yet taken over by
the “metropolitan invasion":

> There was the swimming-hole in the mill stream — and the flooding of
> the meadow for skating around the evening bonfire. There was the
> “after haying” picnic on the river intervals — and the
> “double-runner” coasting parties by February moonlight. There was
> baseball — and there was shinny: rainy-day pout fishing — and
> tracking rabbits. There was the mud scow on the spring meadow — and
> there was fishing through the ice. There was the illustrated lecture
> — on the planetary bodies or the Norman Conquest. There
> was Evangeline read aloud on a long solstice evening. There were May
> baskets on twilight doorsteps, with loud knockings and merry routs
> for conquest; there was “drop the handkerchief” on the Common. There
> was the midsummer authors’ carnival. There was the strawberry
> festival on the green and the corn-husking on the barn floor. There
> was the farmers’ supper and the ladies’ autumn fair. (There were
> quadrilles and reels and slides.) There was the Grand Masquerade in
> the January thaw. The church bell rang out on the night before the
> Fourth, as the sleigh bells did on the night before Christmas.

> This array of colonial cultural activity is not given in order to
> picture an ideal. Nor is it a dream of village life in
> eighteenth-century New England. In every one — and more — of the
> customs cited, I have myself taken part personally since the 1880’s.

Why the extensive quotes from a book that’s almost a century old?

MacKaye reminds us that the congested city and the soulless suburb and
the car-dominated exurb aren’t actually our only choices. America, but
especially colonial America, was once filled with country villages —
small, walkable, friendly to children, not dependent on cars, socially
coherent, in tune with the organic world.

I submit that it’s time to bring that back. But with all the
conveniences and inventions of modern technology.

#### The Modern Country Town

There’s just no getting around the fact that city centers are getting
less and less affordable. The same story is playing out in New York,
San Francisco, Seattle, Chicago, Austin, Denver, Portland, Los
Angeles, Houston. More people are moving in and not enough housing is
being built. Traffic is getting worse. Commutes are longer. Our time
and money are being siphoned off to rents and mortgage interest and
traffic.

There are ways to improve the situation. More housing, more density,
and better mass transit are all desperately needed. But the entrenched
interests — the “real estate state", landlords, longtime residents, in
particular — have all the power. Big infrastructure projects are more
expensive, more difficult, and more disruptive than ever. Our big
cities are saturated. We will probably have to wait until a large
number of middle-aged homeowners die off before we can speed things
up. And even then, there’s no knowing whether their heirs will be more
willing to embrace density and change.

At the same time, land in rural America is cheap and wide open for
development, and more and more jobs can be done anywhere there’s an
internet connection. In 2016, more than 8% of all workers in the U.S.
were "fully remote.” [^9]

Moreover, anybody who’s paying any attention to our climate and
sustainability problems understands that we have to find new ways to
live within our ecological means. Reducing carbon emission is just one
part of the puzzle. We also have to find ways to manage our water, our
forests, our plastics, our biodiversity, our waste. Inevitably that’s
going to involve changing every aspect of the way we live: how we
shop, how we share, how we feed and house and clothe ourselves, how we
vacation, how we raise our children.

Where are the frontierswomen of the modern sustainable lifestyle going
to come from? Is this dramatic shift in our way of life really going
to be led by the federal government, or state governments, or city
councils that can’t figure out how to provide beds for people sleeping
on the streets in record numbers? It seems just far more likely that
the action is going to happen somewhere else, where the numbers are
smaller, the stakes are lower, and small groups of like-minded
individuals can move much more quickly without enormous entrenched
interests to battle.

In sum, the conditions are ripe for a rural revival, led by online
workers and the new frontierspeople of sustainable living.

It’s not terribly hard to imagine what this project would look like:
take the old model of the colonial New England town and update it with
modern technology and values.

Homes are close enough together — think small cottages, row houses,
and townhouses — that towns are walkable for children and adults
alike. Multi-family housing is the norm, making it easier for
grandparents and extended family and close friends to live in close
vicinity, so child care is less of a hassle and kids are freer to
roam. Cars are second-class citizens in the town centers, so it’s safe
the children to get around on their own. Perhaps there are
speed-limited electric vans around dedicated alleys to move the larger
freight. There’s a modern equivalent of the Town Common — public space
for gathering, strolling, conversation, interchange and recreation.
The rural resources are managed by the town, so you can perhaps get a
town solar farm on the outskirts and a public farm for producing the
kinds of produce that really makes sense to be done locally, like
greens and fruits. With the magic of e-commerce and the internet, the
world’s infinite selection of goods and cultural products are all
still just a click away. The cost of land is a fraction of what it
costs in the nearest metropolis.

What about the church? The old New England towns were bound by their
religious faith more than perhaps anything else. Well, I think
something like a “church of sustainability” will take its place —
along with its own set of institutions and physical monuments and
rituals and instruction. The challenge of remaking our civilization in
harmony with the natural world, and that will be adaptable and
resilient in the face of a more unpredictable climate — is as great
and profound as any that humanity has ever faced. And so I think it’ll
take a sacred commitment and religious devotion, too. Part of the
genius of starting new rural villages is that the population
self-selects, so you can be sure that everybody gets the new religion.

How could such a project get off the ground?

It’s just a series of steps. The first one is for enough people to
declare that it’s something they’re interested in doing. Then you have
to find a starting point. It doesn’t have to be as dramatic as the
epic Mormon journey for their promised land in Utah. One way is to
start with an affordable plot in or adjacent to an existing town and
highway, where some of the big infrastructure (power and water) are
already available. Another entry point is to start as a seasonal or
temporary “retreat center” for online workers — where they can go for
six months or a year to enjoy good weather and low rent. It could turn
into a more permanent settlement over time. And finally, there’s a lot
of energy and ingenuity happening at the big summer festivals. Every
Labor Day, for example, 65,000 souls create a zero-waste city from
scratch for the Burning Man festival. Starting a humble village of
5,000 is only a fraction of that effort.

To be sure, such a project is probably more appealing to someone like
me — a new parent, with established friends and family to bring along,
thinking about kids — and perhaps less so to a young bachelorette who
might be more interested in meeting new people or exploring new social
spaces. A small village is certainly more intimate, so you’d have to
be pretty sure that you’re going to have good friends or family in
town.

#### The Mass Mobilization

A lot of people I know under the age of 40 expect there to be a major
mass mobilization in our lifetimes. It’s often compared to the
mobilization during the Second World War: a time when consumers and
industry agree to certain shared goals, to extra coordination, and to
make shared sacrifices in pursuit of a higher civic goal. Instead of
fighting another nation-state, though, this time around it’ll be a
fight for the survival of modern civilization in the face of
environmental and humanitarian catastrophes.

There are “reactive” and “proactive” versions of the story. The
“reactive” version is in response to some very acute disaster:
economic collapse, agricultural failure, humanitarian crisis, outbreak
of an uncontrollable pathogen or technology gone haywire. The
“proactive” version is an attempt to mobilize before the worst
disaster hits. It’s more effective (since it theoretically prevents
the worst of the damage) but it’s also harder to pull off, since
people have to be convinced of a threat before it strikes.

If you feel that a mass mobilization is likely — based on your
assessment of likelihood of environmental and humanitarian disaster —
then I think you’ll prefer for the “proactive” scenario to happen.
It’s got less violence, less vengeance, less panic, more time for
people to strategize and behave rationally.

How do you make the “proactive” scenario more likely? By waiting for a
government solution? I think that helping to found a sustainable new
village — learning how to literally mobilize your friends and family —
is a pretty decent place to start.

It will take a long time. City founders never live to see all their
work come to fruition. But as the Greeks said, “A wise man is one who
plants trees whose shade he won’t live enough to enjoy.” Besides, the
overwhelming scientific consensus is that death is a useful but
man-made concept that isn’t defined anywhere in the laws of
physics. The great projects that outlive our human bodies are
literally just as “alive” as our bodies are. We should nurture them.


# References:

[^1]: <http://www.tvhistory.tv/tv-prices.htm>
[^2]: <https://www.gobankingrates.com/saving-money/car/heres-much-car-today-would-cost-year-were-born/#12>
[^3]: <https://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/sr/sr397.pdf>
[^4]: <https://www.nber.org/digest/jul06/w11895.html>
[^5]: <https://pressblog.uchicago.edu/2018/05/04/lilliana-mason-and-the-age-of-mega-identity-politics-on-the-ezra-klein-show.html>
[^6]: <https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/052015/which-has-performed-better-historically-stock-market-or-real-estate.asp>
[^7]: <https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/politics/capitol-hill-homeowners-say-upzone-would-mar-their-views-of-lake-union/>
[^8]: <https://s3.amazonaws.com/media.mediapost.com/uploads/Nielsen_-_Q22018NielsenTotalAudienceReport.pdf>
[^9]: <https://news.gallup.com/reports/199961/7.aspx>
